[Music]
hello everybody and welcome back to this
month's night sky news where we go
through everything that's gonna be
visible in the night sky this coming
month and everything that's happened in
space news in the past month every
single paper a journal article that I
mentioned will be linked in the
description down below for you and I've
also put timestamps for those of you
that just really want to skip ahead and
hear about Planet 9 being a primordial
black hole possibly maybe anyway before
we get to that let's start by looking up
the first thing I want to talk about
this month is that mercury is going into
retrograde on the 31st of October what
that means is that it's going to appear
night by night as if mercury is going
backwards in the sky compared to all of
the background stars that rise in the
east and set in the West mercury will
appear to get more eastward as the
nights go on now that's all to do with
our perspective from it it's the fact
that mercury orbits our Sun about 4
times faster than the earth does and so
it overtaking us as it goes round in its
circular orbit so if you imagine that
you're driving a pretty slow car around
a racecar track and a really fast car
comes zooming past you goes round to the
other side from your perspective in a
slow car it looks as if the fast car on
the other side of the track is going in
the opposite direction to you when in
reality it's just going around the track
in a circle and it's the same sort of
thing that we see on earth when we
observe mercury in the sky problem is
thousands of years ago in the pre light
pollution era and pre Netflix days
people look to the sky of entertainment
and things to do in the evening and so
they would notice this much more than
say you what I would notice this looking
towards the east before sunrise to
happen to notice every morning that
mercury had changed position slightly
not how we'd expect and so people
attributed a lot of superstition to
these times when mercury would go into
retrograde and so modern day astrologers
also continue this superstition linking
mercury in retrograde with human events
that are taking place on earth which we
know is absolute because
is mercury is an inanimate planet and it
has been over seeing the Sun for
four-and-a-half billion years and it
doesn't care at all about human
endeavors on earth but it's linked with
like people losing their keys and we
shouldn't make big decisions and the
thing that I still can't quite believe
is the a major publication in the UK
actually ran a story on Mercury going
into retrograde on the 31st of October
which happens to be brexit deadline day
and so they made this link between
mercury going into retrograde and Briggs
at deadline day saying it's going to be
chaos because of mercury going into
retrograde
I mean Briggs it's probably going to be
chaos anyway and it'll have nothing to
do with Mercury inanimate planets do not
care about our politics then into
November an opportunity to do one of my
favorite things in the sky which is use
the moon to find cooler more difficult
to find objects and so on the first the
second of November the moon is gonna be
right in between Jupiter and Saturn on
the skies I mean one of these waxing
crescent I eat it's a crescent moon
that's getting bigger it's going towards
a full moon and so on the first November
it's gonna be closer to Jupiter and by
the second November it will be closer to
Saturn so if you have binoculars
somewhere in the house
break them out I know I say this every
month I'm like a broken record but
seriously if you haven't done it yet you
must because there's so much that you
can actually see by looking at Jupiter
and Saturn we've also got a transit of
the Sun by mercury coming up on the 11th
of November as well that's gonna be
something that you'll be able to observe
anywhere in the world except sort of
eastern Asia and Oceania you guys gonna
miss out on that unfortunate it'll be
night time for you when it occurs the
rest of us though we should be able to
see this if we have access to a solar
telescope with a filter on it so it
makes it safe to actually look at the
Sun and observe mercury passing in front
of it and if you thinking well that's no
use cause clearly I don't own anything
like that look up if your local
astronomy Society does have something
like that and perhaps even if they're
putting on an event to observe the
transit of mercury as well because I
know a lot of them will be doing and
they do amazing work in communities to
make sure that people do have access to
telescopes to see these kind
events so a shout out 12 the local
astronomy groups doing amazing work if
you don't have access to a local
astronomy society there will be some
live streams of the event through NASA
and ISA as well and then also all of the
astrophotography images that will come
online in the days following which I'm
really looking forward to seeing ok on
to my favorite part now the part where
we discuss what's happened in space news
in the past month
first up the Nobel Prize for Physics in
2019 is it been announced and it went to
astronomers it was jointly awarded with
half going to Divya quello and Mikkel
Mayo for their discovery of the very
first exoplanet in 1995 and I made a
video on that last week that went
through the history of that entire field
one of my decade by decade videos
looking at how all the results sort of
piled together to add to our
understanding and the other half went to
Jim Peebles
for his contribution to the field of
theoretical cosmology this was really
sort of a lifetime achievement Nobel
Prize award rather than the award that
went to Cuellar a male which was more of
a discovery prize Jim Peebles really
made the field of cosmology doable
essentially he came up with a lot of the
theory that described the universe in
its very early stages so first of all he
explained what the signal was that
Penzias and Wilson who won the Nobel
Prize previously detected in the Cosmic
Microwave Background he said that it had
to be this afterglow of the Big Bang he
came up with all of the theory
describing what the universe would have
been like in the very early stages after
the Big Bang and then also said this is
how we would observe this and how we
would test if that was indeed true which
a lot of people then went off to do and
won Nobel prizes for it where where as
Jim was the one that actually came up
with the idea of how to do it in the
first place and that's happened a number
of times in his career so I'm really
glad to see that the Nobel Prize
Committee has actually awarded Jim the
prize this year because I've heard he's
also one of the nicest men in the world
as well so I think the Astronomy
community was very happy to hear this
month that he had been acknowledged
now one of my favorite news stories this
month was about satin and you all know
Saturn is my favorite planet hands down
so it was very pleased to hear this
result that they'd found 20 more moons
around Saturn making its total number of
moons that are known up to 82 pipping
Jupiter to the post which has 79 moons
these were all discovered using the
Subaru telescope in Hawaii which had
previously discovered 17 new moons of
Jupiter last year and how they did that
was take images of the surrounding
regions of Jupiter and Saturn and just
noticed night by night if anything had
mu of course they also have to make sure
that their survey is complete they make
sure that every single night they're
detecting down to a certain faintness
which would give you a certain size
object at that distance so for Jupiter
it meant that they could actually detect
everything down to about a mile across
whereas for Saturn they could only
detect things that were about three
miles across so this is why it's
actually likely that Saturn does indeed
have more moons of Jupiter because we
count in 79 around Jupiter that are at
least a mile across
whereas we counted at 82 and we've only
got the things that are three miles
across and up we haven't even got down
to the mile across the level around
Saturn just because it's much further
away of these 20 new moons they found
around Saturn though 17 are all grouped
together they orbit around Saturn in a
retrograde motion ie they orbit in the
opposite direction to which Saturn
rotates and they all have very very
similar orbital parameters and so the
authors of the paper that announced this
discovery said it was probably that they
were in the past one single moon and
some sort of impact has actually broken
that moon up into these 17 different
fragments which might explain why Saturn
ends up having more moons than Jupiter
just like when they discovered the moons
of Jupiter though they're asking people
to suggest names for these new moons
that have been found around Saturn I
think you can name five of them and
they're asking people to tweet their
suggestions to at Saturn's lunacy and it
will put that
Tagg down in the description below so
that I actually kept the spelling right
and you could actually then be sent to
the right place but obviously they're
looking for you know serious and
realistic suggestions for names that
probably have some link to Saturn in
Roman mythology and in Greek mythology
as well so as much as I'd want to call a
moon you know like moon emic Saturn face
unless I can find some reference to that
in Greek mythology we're probably not
going to get that one past them the
other big news this month was a really
cool detection that has been made
possible thanks to the music
spectrograph on the VLT if you haven't
heard of muse it's an amazing instrument
and it's one that literally astronomers
are currently clamoring over to use
because it doesn't just take a single
image or a single spectra of an object
which is where we take the light from an
object split it through a prism and and
get it sort of fingerprint of all the
different wavelengths
it has in that object it can take many
all at once over a huge area of sky also
with a very very high resolution as well
and so you can really probe a lot of
detail in whatever object you're looking
at and that was key for what's been done
this month which is detect the filaments
the gas in filaments that connects
galaxies in the universe so when we put
all the laws of physics into a computer
and we start with you know just this
like soup of hydrogen gas that would
have been the early universe and we just
sort of let it run over time with all
the laws of physics just in there
everything starts to clump together
under gravity because all of a sudden
you have like two particles that are
clumped together and they become like
the densest thing in the universe even
there was just two clump together and
then it sort of snowballs from there and
the structure we end up getting out of
these simulations is this weird web-like
structure where you have these big nodes
where there's a lot of stuff that are
all connected by these long thin
filaments and we think that the nodes
that's where all the galaxies form and
then these filaments are just the
leftover hydrogen gas that can actually
then feed into galaxies to give them
more fuel to make stars now we've
obviously observed galaxies before
because well they're really really
right because they're made of like
hundreds of billions of stars they'd be
pretty difficult to spot but the gas
sort of bridges or filaments connecting
them we've not really been able to
observe to confirm that that is the
actual structure of the universe because
well you can't see a lot of gases can
you like gas here right now can't see it
so to actually detect this gas they had
to go to one of the densest parts of the
universe it was what's called a proto
closer of galaxies so something that
will eventually grow to be one of these
huge clusters of galaxies we see today
in the current universe but they
observed it in the very early universe
it's 12 billion light years away so the
light that's being emitted from it that
we're detecting now is coming from a
universe that was under 2 billion years
old and the thing is about this cluster
is that the galaxies within it are
forming a lot of stars because the
universe was much denser back then so
the star formation rate was much higher
and also the rate at which supermassive
black holes was being fed was much
higher as well and that means the limit
at which you can feed a black hole was
reached very quickly and so a lot of
that material never actually made it
into the black hole and instead was shot
out in these huge radiation jets so all
of the radiation from the extra star
formation and all of the radiation from
the over feeding of black holes
basically was shot out into this sort of
intra cluster medium and hit into all of
the gas there it excited a lot of the
electrons in the gas to higher energy
levels which when they dropped down
would emit a very specific wavelength of
light we call it the lyman-alpha line is
very common wavelength of emission that
we see from hydrogen all across the
universe then using these filaments the
gas isn't very dense and so the glow
that we get from it is very very faint I
worked out that it was something like a
billion billion times fainter than
Jupiter in the night sky that gets
ridiculous but with muse by observing it
for a very very long time in great great
detail they were able to detect this
lyman-alpha emission from hydrogen gas
in the filaments
acting the galaxies in this cluster and
revealing the rogue of something like
three billion light-years long and so
really did permeate the structure of the
universe at least in the early universe
the assumption is obviously then there
that because we see that structure in
the early universe and simulations and
it continues until our present-day
universe that we must also have that
structure now as well we've at least
been able to prove that it is there in
the early universe though and that is
definitely a milestone in proving that
it is here in our current universe still
as well and now the result I think maybe
what we're waiting for right this paper
that came out this month by Jacob
Schultz and James Irwin that was just
titled is planet 9 a primordial black
hole which probably wins in my book
anyway like the award for the best title
of any academic paper in 2019 just
because it's like almost entitled like a
YouTube video right that's trying to
make you click on it and it was such an
intriguing paper to read the idea that
they've come up with here is very
compelling it sounds like it's pulled
out of science fiction but actually when
you read through their arguments it does
make sense so let's start at the
beginning
planet 9 you probably thinking wasn't
Pluto Planet 9 and yeah we'd downgraded
it unfortunately to a dwarf planet I
talked about that in a previous video
I'll link it up in a card when I figure
out which one it was and for those who
don't know the history the reason that
people went searching for Pluto in the
first place was because Neptune's orbit
is a bit strange it's a lot more
elliptical than the rest of the planets
in the solar system and people didn't
really understand why it would be so
strange and the idea was raised that
perhaps there was another planet beyond
Neptune that it was interacting with
that would be disturbing its orbit when
they found Pluto they thought that that
would be that planet of course there's
more research was done on Pluto people
realized that it was actually a lot
smaller than they originally thought and
so it wasn't actually large enough to
perturb the orbit of Neptune as much as
it was then of course the Kuiper belt
and all of these what we call trans
Newtonian objects T and O's were all
discovered sort of a secondary asteroid
belt right out on the far
edge of the solar system and then people
thought what perhaps the entire
collective of all of those things is
what's perturbing Neptune's orbit then
they realize that also the orbits of the
tno s these transmute o nyan objects
were also very strange a lot of them
clumped together as if they were being
shepherded by some other much larger
planet that was out there and so for a
long time now this idea of a planet 9
has been discussed amongst solar system
astrophysicists there's been a lot of
in-depth searches done for it including
one of the Zooniverse citizen science
projects as well but got people to rule
out a big swath of space that planet 9
current couldn't me be obviously what
makes the search difficult is that this
planet is probably going to be at
something like 500 times the earth-sun
distance it would have an incredibly
long orbital period and so it's not
expected to move that much in the sky so
it makes it very difficult to spot it
but what the shots and Unwin paper from
this month did which I thought was very
interesting was linked that problem that
people are working on with another
unexplained problem which is that a
survey that's looking for gravitational
lens objects it's called the ogle survey
OGL II has found some unexplained
gravitational lenses that they can't
account for their brief brightening in
sort of the direction of the Galactic
bulge in the southern hemisphere that
when they calculate well how big is the
mass of the object that we think is
causing this lensing it's about 0.5
times the mass of the earth - about 20
times the mass of the earth that's the
range that they're sort of working with
and it's very similar to the range that
people have estimated that planet Nine's
mass would be to have this effect on
these trans-neptunian objects I think
that range is something like 5 to 15
times the mass of Earth and so they've
said perhaps both of these problems can
be explained if planet 9 isn't actually
a planet a rocky planet that's you know
five times the mass of Earth
but instead is a black hole that's
causing these brief micro lensing events
the algo survey is also picking up and
when they say primordial black hole what
they mean there is a black hole that
wasn't formed you know from a star
living its life dying going supernova
and producing a black hole they mean a
black hole that was produced in the very
early days of the solar system okay I
clearly meant to say universe they're a
not solar system a primordial black hole
is one that is formed in the early
universe and it would be incredibly
small in comparison to what we think of
a black hole if it was five times the
mass of the earth it would be something
like five centimeters across which is
about the diameter of this plant pop
like this would be the size of the black
hole that could be in the solar system
five hundred times the distance from the
earth to the Sun right now now it might
sound a little bit far-fetched but when
people consider well how did this sort
of Planet 9 you know form and get out
there in the first place there's three
different options the first is that it
formed in situ
formed out 500 times the distance of the
Earth and the Sun in the outer solar
system from whatever you know rubble and
remnants from the formation of the Sun
were there the second is that it formed
may be round near Uranus and Neptune and
actually migrated outwards to where it
is now and the third is that it is a
captured free-floating planet which
sounds far-fetched but actually is
people start stimulate more planetary
formation models they find that actually
a lot of planetesimals as we call them
the things before they actually reach
sort of planet status do get flung out
in that process so it wouldn't be
unlikely that a planet that had been
flung out from around another star could
actually be captured by the gravity of
the Sun and end up orbiting very very
far out and that's actually the most
favored of all of those three options at
the minute because there's problems with
the first two the first one where you
fall
out in sissu is that it's not very dense
out there and so they're physically
isn't enough time for that very undead's
matter to clump together to form
something that's 5 to 15 times the mass
of the earth in the four and a half
billion years that the Sun and the solar
system has been around for the second
option where you form something in the
denser regions towards Uranus and
Neptune then it migrates out is also
problematic because you need an event
that first of all kicks the planet to go
further out but then also stops it in
its current orbit as well so you'd
probably need for the Sun to have had
some sort of close flyby with another
star at some point in its history and
there's no other evidence for that
having happened in the other objects in
the solar system as well so the most
favored formation mechanism for planet 9
is a captured free-floating planet and
the authors pointed out that actually
the probability of that happening is no
different from the probability of
capturing a primordial black hole either
obviously the problem with planet 9
turning out to be a primordial black
hole would be that all of these specific
searches for Planet 9 in the optical and
infrared pointless because you'd never
be able to see a black hole with that
kind of radiation what the authors
suggest though is a way that we could
confirm if it was a black hole that was
out there so the black hole orbiting the
solar system would have actually
collected a halo of matter around it and
then also a halo of dark matter as well
we think there's sort of two protons
worth of dark matter in every teaspoon
of space in the solar system and it
would have accreted a lot of that matter
towards it it wouldn't have actually
necessarily accreted it to make itself
grow in mass but it would have this big
large halo of mass sort of that it's
shepherding around along its orbit and
if the dark matter in that halo was to
what we say
annihilate with some anti dark matter so
we have matter and we have antimatter
which we have a lot more matter in the
universe than we do have antimatter but
it's there in traces and when the two
come together they do annihilate they
essentially turn pure mass into energy
by Einsteins E
cause MC squared and so if that were to
happen we should be able to detect that
radiation with the gamma and x-ray
telescopes that we currently have in
orbit around Earth combining those
detection x' with the ogle microlensing
and the known orbits will the
trans-neptunian objects what allow us to
build a model of whether it really was a
primordial black hole what we were
seeing and how massive that primordial
black hole would have to be so it's a
really interesting idea one that at
first glance I thought would be
completely theoretical but after reading
the paper and seeing that actually they
gave a way that we could actually
observational II constrain this as well
I am so invested in this idea now
because you know that black holes are my
favorite and if it turns out the solar
system has its own like kept black hole
oh that would just make my entire year
alright I think that was a very exciting
note sky news for this month there was
everything in there my favorite planet
my favorite object in black holes so I
hope that you also enjoyed it as well I
wish you all happy stargazing and some
clear skies you can't see this right now
but behind the camera is all of our
clothes in just just piles and piles of
suitcases and they've been like that for
about a month since we moved in because
we haven't had any wardrobes and today
is finally the day that we're gonna get
wardrobes I am waiting on an immanent
IKEA delivery and I have never been more
excited to build flat-pack furniture in
my life I don't know one tell me I had
lipstick on my teeth these were all
discovered using the Subaru telescope
coupe
oh I just had the best thought muse
should cover their song supermassive
black hole but for primordial black hole
for Planet nine like if they ever
actually detect it that would be
incredible oh my universe if anybody
knows any of the members of muse send
them this clip and tell them dr. Becky
has asked has begged for them to cover
that song because that would just make
why wouldn't you make my year would make
my entire life let's put it that way
you